CAN

CONSOLIDATION

Employment Support Act

S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 56

Current to February 4, 2025

Published by the Minister of Justice at the following address:
http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca

OFFICIAL STATUS
OF CONSOLIDATIONS

Subsections 31(1) and (2) of the Legislation Revision and
Consolidation Act, in force on June 1, 2009, provide as
follows:

Published consolidation is evidence

31 (1) Every copy of a consolidated statute or consolidated
regulation published by the Minister under this Act in either
print or electronic form is evidence of that statute or regula-
tion and of its contents and every copy purporting to be pub-
lished by the Minister is deemed to be so published, unless
the contrary is shown.

Inconsistencies in Acts

(2) In the event of an inconsistency between a consolidated
statute published by the Minister under this Act and the origi-
nal statute or a subsequent amendment as certified by the
Clerk of the Parliaments under the Publication of Statutes
Act, the original statute or amendment prevails to the extent
of the inconsistency.

LAYOUT

The notes that appeared in the left or right margins are
now in boldface text directly above the provisions to
which they relate. They form no part of the enactment,
but are inserted for convenience of reference only.

NOTE

This consolidation is current to February 4, 2025. Any
amendments that were not in force as of February 4, 2025
are set out at the end of this document under the heading
“Amendments Not in Force”.

Current to February 4, 2025

TABLE OF PROVISIONS

An Act to support employment in Canada by
mitigating the disruptive effect on Canadian industry
of the imposition of foreign import surtaxes or other
actions of a like effect

Short Title

1 Short title

Interpretation
2 Definitions
Purpose of Act
3 Purpose
Provision of Moneys
4 Payment out of C.R.F.
5 Administration expenses

Employment Support Board

6 Constitution of Board

7 Meetings

8 Administering grants

9 Rules

10 Reports
Employment Support Grants

11 Application

12 Amount of grant

13 Levels to be maintained

14 Factors to be considered

15 Special case

16 Time of payment

17 How payment made
General

18 Regulations

19 Recovery

20 Income

21 Annual report

Current to February 4, 2025 i

S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 56

An Act to support employment in Canada by
mitigating the disruptive effect on Canadian
industry of the imposition of foreign import
surtaxes or other actions of a like effect

[Assented to 14th October 1971]

Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, en-
acts as follows:

Short Title

Short title
1 This Act may cited as the Employment Support Act.

Interpretation

Definitions
2 In this Act,

assistance period means any period in relation to
which a grant may be authorized under this Act; (pé-
riode d’assistance)

Board means the Employment Support Board estab-
lished under this Act; (Commission)

grant means an employment support grant authorized
under this Act; (subvention)

manufacturer means a person, firm or corporation op-
erating an activity in Canada whereby any goods, prod-
ucts, commodities or wares

Current to February 4, 2025

Employment Support
Interpretation

Purpose of Act
Sections 2-5

(a) are made, fabricated or refined out of raw material
or other substance or combination thereof,

(b) are converted or rebuilt, or

(c) are made by causing any raw material or other
substance to undergo a significant chemical, bio-
chemical or physical change including change that
preserves or improves the keeping qualities of that
raw material or other substance but excluding change
by growth or decay; (fabricant)

Minister means the Minister of Industry; (Ministre)

plant means the premises on which are situated the fix-
tures, implements, machinery or apparatus used in car-
rying on any activity of a manufacturer; (usine)

prescribed means prescribed by regulations made un-
der this Act. (prescrit)
1995, c. 1, s. 39.

Purpose of Act

Purpose

3 The purpose of this Act is to provide a means to sup-
port levels of employment in Canadian industry when
other countries impose temporary import surtaxes or
take other actions having a like effect that adversely af-
fect employment in Canadian industry.

Provision of Moneys

Payment out of C.R.F.

4 (1) The amounts required for the purposes of making
grants under this Act in the fiscal year 1971-72 shall be
paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund.

Limitation
(2) The aggregate of all amounts expended pursuant to
subsection (1) shall not exceed eighty million dollars.

Administration expenses

5 Amounts required to defray the expenses of adminis-
tering this Act in the fiscal year 1971-72 shall be paid out
of the Consolidated Revenue Fund but the aggregate of
all such amounts shall not exceed three hundred thou-
sand dollars.

Current to February 4, 2025

Employment Support
Interpretation
Employment Support Board
Sections 6-7

Employment Support Board

Constitution of Board

6 (1) A Board is hereby established to be known as the
Employment Support Board consisting of not more than
seven members to be appointed by the Governor in
Council.

Public Service members

(2) Not more than two-thirds of the members of the
Board at any time may be members of the Public Service
within the meaning of the Public Service Employment
Act but a vacancy occurring in the membership of the
Board that has the effect of temporarily reducing the
number of members of the Board who are not members
of the Public Service below one-third of the members of
the Board does not invalidate the constitution of the
Board or impair the right of the members to act if the
number of members is not less than a quorum.

Chairman

(3) The Chairman of the Board shall be appointed by the
Governor in Council from among those members of the
Board who are not members of the Public Service.

Alternate members

(4) Where a member of the Public Service has been ap-
pointed to the Board pursuant to subsection (2), the Min-
ister presiding over the department in which that mem-
ber is employed may designate one or more persons
holding a senior position in that department to be an al-
ternate member of the Board, who may exercise all the
powers, duties and functions of the member in the event
of the absence or temporary inability to act of the mem-
ber for whom he has been designated an alternate.

Emoluments

(5) The Governor in Council shall determine the emolu-
ments to be paid and the expenses to be allowed to the
members of the Board who are not members of the Pub-
lic Service.

Meetings

7 (1) The Board shall meet at such times and conduct its
proceedings in such manner as may seem to it most con-
venient for the speedy despatch of business.

Quorum
(2) Three members of the Board constitute a quorum.

Current to February 4, 2025

Employment Support
Interpretation
Employment Support Board
Sections 7-11

(3) The Chairman shall preside at any sittings of the
Board at which he is present and shall designate one of
the other members to preside at any sittings of the Board
at which he is not present.

Administering grants

8 (1) Subject to the regulations and the direction of the
Minister, the Board shall administer the grants autho-
rized under this Act and shall perform such other duties
and functions as the Minister may assign to it.

Staff

(2) In carrying out its duties and functions under this
Act, the Board shall use the staff and facilities of the De-
partment of Industry, Trade and Commerce and, to the
extent deemed necessary by the Board, may, on the di-
rection of the Governor in Council, make use of such oth-
er services of the Government of Canada as are available
and required by it.

Rules

9 Subject to the regulations, the Board may make such
rules as may be necessary for the conduct of its meetings,
the management of its affairs and the performance of its
duties and functions and may do all things that are nec-
essary or proper to carry out its duties and functions un-
der this Act.

Reports

10 The Board shall keep such records and books and
make such reports on its activities from time to time as
the Minister may require.

Employment Support Grants

Application

11 Upon application therefor to the Board by a manu-
facturer who establishes that the work force at his plant
is or is likely to be significantly reduced through lay-offs
during a specified period by reason of the application of
measures taken by other countries in respect of imports
therein from Canada, the Board may, subject to this Act
and the regulations, authorize the payment to the manu-
facturer of an employment support grant pursuant to this
Act in respect of any prescribed assistance period deter-
mined by the Board in respect of that manufacturer.

Current to February 4, 2025

Employment Support
Interpretation

Employment Support Grants
Sections 12-15

Amount of grant

12 The amount of any grant that may be authorized by
the Board to a manufacturer shall neither exceed such
amount as may be prescribed nor be greater than any
lesser amount that, in the opinion of the Board, would be
adequate to maintain employment by the manufacturer
throughout the prescribed assistance period at such lev-
els as those prescribed or specified by the Board, as the
case may be.

Levels to be maintained

13 No grant shall be paid to a manufacturer in respect of
a plant or otherwise for an assistance period unless at the
termination of the assistance period, the Board is satis-
fied that, to the extent that in the opinion of the Board
was possible under the circumstances, the manufacturer
has maintained the level of employment throughout the
assistance period in accordance with the specifications of
the Board or at prescribed levels if the Board did not
specify any levels of employment for that manufacturer.

Factors to be considered

14 The Board in considering an application by a manu-
facturer for a grant in respect of a plant or otherwise
shall take into account all relevant factors including

(a) the levels of employment and production at other
plants in Canada of the manufacturer or of any per-
sons associated or affiliated with the manufacturer,
and

(b) the prices paid by the manufacturer to suppliers
for goods that enter into the cost of production of the
manufacturer.

Special case

15 (1) Where a manufacturer who makes an application
under this Act for a grant is unable to comply with any
regulations applicable in his case and the Board is of the
opinion that a grant to the manufacturer would not be
outside the purposes of this Act, as described in section 3,
the Board may, having regard to the purposes of this Act,
recommend to the Governor in Council that a grant be
authorized under this Act for that manufacturer.

Special grant

(2) If, following a recommendation under subsection (1),
the Governor in Council so directs, the Board may autho-
rize payment of a grant to the manufacturer for an assis-
tance period in such amount as it considers appropriate
for the purpose of maintaining employment at a plant of

Current to February 4, 2025

Employment Support
Interpretation

Employment Support Grants
Sections 15-18

the manufacturer, subject to such terms and conditions,
if any, as may be set out in the directions of the Governor
in Council.

Time of payment

16 (1) Subject to subsection (2), payment of a grant au-
thorized by the Board to a manufacturer in respect of a
plant of the manufacturer or otherwise for an assistance
period shall not be made until the termination of such as-
sistance period.

Exception

(2) Notwithstanding section 13, the Board may, if in its
opinion circumstances so warrant, authorize payments to
a manufacturer during the assistance period of the man-
ufacturer of amounts on account of the grant payable in
respect of that assistance period.

How payment made

17 Where the Board authorizes the payment of a grant,
or the payment of any amount on account of a grant, toa
manufacturer, the amount so authorized shall be paid by
the Receiver General on the requisition of the Minister.

General

Regulations
18 The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) respecting the assistance period or periods in re-
spect of which grants may be paid or applied under
this Act;

(b) respecting the level or levels of employment that
are to be maintained during any prescribed assistance
period as a qualification for a grant under this Act;

(c) respecting the information to be submitted with
applications for grants or to be required for the pur-
poses of such applications;

(d) respecting the manner or means in or by which
the amounts of any grants shall be computed, which,
so far as practicable, shall be related to the extent of
the adverse effects incurred by a manufacturer by rea-
son of the imposition of foreign import surtaxes or the
taking of other foreign actions having a like effect;

(e) prescribing the matters that shall be taken into ac-
count in considering whether a manufacturer qualifies
for a grant under this Act; and

Current to February 4, 2025

Employment Support
Interpretation

General

Sections 18-21

(f) generally, respecting any matter or thing necessary
to effect the purposes of this Act.

Recovery

19 Any payment made to a manufacturer as or on ac-
count of a grant to which the manufacturer was not enti-
led under this Act or the regulations shall be repaid to
he Receiver General by the manufacturer and may be re-
covered from the manufacturer at any time as a debt due
‘o Her Majesty in right of Canada.

Income

20 For greater certainty, any amount paid to a manufac-
urer as a grant under this Act shall, for the purposes of
he Income Tax Act, be included in computing the in-
come of the manufacturer from carrying on his business
for his taxation year in which the amount was received by
him.

Annual report

21 The Minister shall as soon as possible after the end of
each annual quarter prepare a report on the administra-
tion of this Act during that annual quarter and shall
cause such report to be laid before Parliament forthwith
upon the completion thereof or, if Parliament is not then
sitting, on any of the first fifteen days next thereafter that
Parliament is sitting.

Current to February 4, 2025
