CAN

CONSOLIDATION

Employment Equity Act

S.C. 1995, c. 44

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Published by the Minister of Justice at the following address:
http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca

OFFICIAL STATUS
OF CONSOLIDATIONS

Subsections 31(1) and (2) of the Legislation Revision and
Consolidation Act, in force on June 1, 2009, provide as
follows:

Published consolidation is evidence

31 (1) Every copy of a consolidated statute or consolidated
regulation published by the Minister under this Act in either
print or electronic form is evidence of that statute or regula-
tion and of its contents and every copy purporting to be pub-
lished by the Minister is deemed to be so published, unless
the contrary is shown.

Inconsistencies in Acts

(2) In the event of an inconsistency between a consolidated
statute published by the Minister under this Act and the origi-
nal statute or a subsequent amendment as certified by the
Clerk of the Parliaments under the Publication of Statutes
Act, the original statute or amendment prevails to the extent
of the inconsistency.

LAYOUT

The notes that appeared in the left or right margins are
now in boldface text directly above the provisions to
which they relate. They form no part of the enactment,
but are inserted for convenience of reference only.

NOTE

This consolidation is current to February 4, 2025. The last
amendments came into force on January 1, 2021. Any
amendments that were not in force as of February 4, 2025
are set out at the end of this document under the heading
“Amendments Not in Force”.

Current to February 4, 2025
Last amended on January 1, 2021

TABLE OF PROVISIONS

An Act respecting employment equity

oon ou

11
12
13
14
15
16

17
18
19
20

21

Short Title

Short title

Purpose of Act

Purpose of Act

Interpretation

Definitions

Application

Application

PARTI

Employment Equity

Employer Obligations

Employer's duty

Employer not required to take certain measures
Employment of Aboriginal peoples

Certain rights not employment barriers
Analysis and review

Employment equity plan

Reasonable progress

Implementation and monitoring of plan
Periodic review and revision of plan
Information about employment equity
Consultation with employee representatives
New employers

Records and Reports

Employment equity records

Reports of private sector employers

Availability of reports of private sector employers

Consolidation to be tabled

Report of Treasury Board

Current to February 4, 2025 i

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
TABLE OF PROVISIONS

22
23
24

25
26

27

28

29

30

31
32

33

34

35
36
37

38
39

40

41

PART Il

Compliance

Compliance Audits

Compliance audits

Powers of compliance officers

Security requirements

Undertakings and Directions

Employer undertaking

Direction of Commission

Requests for Review or Order
Employer's request for review

Employment Equity Review Tribunals
Establishment of Tribunals

Powers of Tribunal

Decision of Tribunal

Enforcement of orders

Report of activities of Human Rights Commission

Limitations respecting Directions and
Orders

Limitation
Privileged Information

Privileged information

PART Ill

Assessment of Monetary Penalties
Violations

Violation

Assessment of monetary penalty

Notice of assessment of monetary penalty
Options

Employer's options

Review by Tribunal

Enforcement of Monetary Penalties

Registration of certificate

PART IV
General

Regulations

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
TABLE OF PROVISIONS

42 Powers, duties and functions of Minister
43 Delegation

44 Review of operation of Act

Transitional Provision

45 Compliance with certain provisions
Consequential Amendments
Repeal

Coming into Force

*55 Coming into force

Current to February 4, 2025
Last amended on January 1, 2021

S.C. 1995, c. 44
An Act respecting employment equity

[Assented to 15th December 1995]

Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of
the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, en-
acts as follows:

Short Title

Short title
1 This Act may be cited as the Employment Equity Act.

Purpose of Act

Purpose of Act

2 The purpose of this Act is to achieve equality in the
workplace so that no person shall be denied employment
opportunities or benefits for reasons unrelated to ability
and, in the fulfilment of that goal, to correct the condi-
tions of disadvantage in employment experienced by
women, Aboriginal peoples, persons with disabilities and
members of visible minorities by giving effect to the prin-
ciple that employment equity means more than treating
persons in the same way but also requires special mea-
sures and the accommodation of differences.

1995, c. 44, s. 2; 2017, c. 26, s. 19(E).

Interpretation

Definitions
3 In this Act,

Aboriginal peoples means persons who are Indians,
Inuit or Métis; (autochtones)

Current to February 4, 2025
Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
Interpretation
Section 3

Canadian workforce means all persons in Canada of
working age who are willing and able to work;
(population apte au travail)

Chairperson means the chairperson of the Canadian
Human Rights Tribunal; (président)

Commission means the Canadian Human Rights Com-
mission established under section 26 of the Canadian
Human Rights Act; (Commission)

compliance officer means a person designated as an
employment equity compliance review officer pursuant
to subsection 22(3); (agent d’application)

designated groups means women, Aboriginal peoples,
persons with disabilities and members of visible minori-
ties; (groupes désignés)

members of visible minorities means persons, other
than Aboriginal peoples, who are non-Caucasian in race
or non-white in colour; (minorités visibles)

Minister means such member of the Queen’s Privy
Council for Canada as is designated by the Governor in
Council as the Minister for the purposes of this Act; (mi-
nistre)

Panel [Repealed, 1998, c. 9, s. 37]

persons with disabilities means persons who have a
long-term or recurring physical, mental, sensory, psychi-
atric or learning impairment and who

(a) consider themselves to be disadvantaged in em-
ployment by reason of that impairment, or

(b) believe that a employer or potential employer is
likely to consider them to be disadvantaged in employ-
ment by reason of that impairment,

and includes persons whose functional limitations owing
to their impairment have been accommodated in their
current job or workplace; (personnes handicapées)

prescribed means prescribed by the regulations; (Ver-
sion anglaise seulement)

private sector employer means any person who em-
ploys one hundred or more employees on or in connec-
tion with a federal work, undertaking or business as de-
fined in section 2 of the Canada Labour Code and
includes any corporation established to perform any
function or duty on behalf of the Government of Canada
that employs one hundred or more employees, but does
not include

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
Interpretation
Sections 3-4

(a) a person who employs employees on or in connec-
tion with a work, undertaking or business of a local or
private nature in Yukon, the Northwest Territories or
Nunavut, or

(b) a departmental corporation as defined in section 2
of the Financial Administration Act; (employeur du
secteur privé)

representatives means

(a) those persons who have been designated by em-
ployees to act as their representatives, or

(b) bargaining agents, where bargaining agents repre-
sent the employees; (représentants)

Tribunal means an Employment Equity Review Tribunal
established by subsection 28(1). (tribunal)

1993, c. 28, s. 78; 1995, c. 44, s. 3; 1998, c. 9, s. 37, c. 15, s. 25; 2002, c. 7, s. 162(E);
2017, c. 26, s. 19(E).

Application

Application
4 (1) This Act applies to

(a) private sector employers;

(b) the portions of the federal public administration
set out in Schedule I or IV to the Financial Adminis-
tration Act;

(c) the portions of the federal public administration
set out in of Schedule V to the Financial Administra-
tion Act that employ one hundred or more employees;
and

(d) such other portion of the public sector employing
one hundred or more employees, including the Cana-
dian Forces and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police,
as may be specified by order of the Governor in Coun-
cil on the recommendation of the Treasury Board, in
consultation with the minister responsible for the
specified portion.

Royal Canadian Mounted Police
(2) For the purposes of this Act,

(a) the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is deemed to
consist only of its members within the meaning of
subsection 2(1) of the Royal Canadian Mounted Po-
lice Act;

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
Application
Section 4

(b) the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is deemed not
to be included in Schedule IV to the Financial
Administration Act; and

(c) civilian employees appointed or employed in ac-
cordance with section 10 of the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police Act are deemed to be included in
Schedule IV to the Financial Administration Act.

Canadian Forces and Royal Canadian Mounted Police

(3) Members of the Canadian Forces and the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police are deemed to be employees
for the purposes of this Act.

Responsibilities of Treasury Board and Public Service
Commission

(4) The Treasury Board and the Public Service Commis-
sion, each acting within the scope of its powers, duties
and functions under the Financial Administration Act
and the Public Service Employment Act, are responsible
for carrying out the obligations of an employer under this
Act in relation to employees employed in those portions
of the federal public administration referred to in para-
graph (1)(b).

Deemed employer

(5) Every portion of the public sector referred to in para-
graphs (1)(c) and (d) is deemed to be an employer for the
purposes of this Act in relation to employees employed in
that portion except that, with respect to any of those por-
tions for which the Public Service Commission exercises
any power or performs any function under the Public
Service Employment Act, the Public Service Commission
and that portion are responsible for carrying out the obli-
gations of an employer under this Act.

References to employer

(6) In this Act, a reference to an employer is deemed, in
relation to those portions of the public sector referred to
in

(a) paragraph (1)(b), to be a reference to the Treasury
Board and the Public Service Commission, each acting
within the scope of its powers and functions under the
Financial Administration Act and the Public Service
Employment Act; and

(b) paragraphs (1)(c) and (d) for which the Public Ser-
vice Commission exercises any power or performs any
function under the Public Service Employment Act, to
be a reference to the employer and the Public Service
Commission.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
Application
Sections 4-5

Delegation by Treasury Board and Public Service
Commission

(7) The Treasury Board and the Public Service Commis-
sion may, for the purpose of carrying out their obliga-
tions under this Act in relation to a portion of the federal
public administration or other portion of the public sec-
tor referred to in subsection (1), authorize the chief exec-
utive officer or deputy head concerned to exercise, in re-
lation to that portion, any of the powers and perform any
of the functions of the Treasury Board or the Public Ser-
vice Commission, as the case may be, referred to in this
section.

Delegation by chief executive officer or deputy head

(8) Any chief executive officer or deputy head authorized
under subsection (7) to exercise any of the powers and
perform any of the duties and functions of the Treasury
Board or Public Service Commission may, subject to and
in accordance with the authorization given to that officer
or deputy head, authorize one or more persons to exer-
cise any of those powers and perform any of those duties
and functions.

1995, c. 44, s. 4; 2001, c. 34, s. 40(F); 2003, c. 22, ss. 163, 236(E).

PARTI

Employment Equity
Employer Obligations

Employer's duty

5 Every employer shall implement employment equity
by

(a) identifying and eliminating employment barriers
against persons in designated groups that result from
the employer’s employment systems, policies and
practices that are not authorized by law; and

(b) instituting such positive policies and practices and
making such reasonable accommodations as will en-
sure that persons in designated groups achieve a de-
gree of representation in each occupational group in
the employer’s workforce that reflects their represen-
tation in

(i) the Canadian workforce, or

(ii) those segments of the Canadian workforce that
are identifiable by qualification, eligibility or geog-
raphy and from which the employer may reason-
ably be expected to draw employees.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART I Employment Equity
Employer Obligations
Sections 6-8

Employer not required to take certain measures

6 The obligation to implement employment equity does
not require an employer

(a) to take a particular measure to implement employ-
ment equity where the taking of that measure would
cause undue hardship to the employer;

(b) to hire or promote persons who do not meet the
essential qualifications for the work to be performed;

(c) with respect to the public sector, to hire or pro-
mote persons without basing the hiring or promotion
on merit in cases where the Public Service Employ-
ment Act requires that hiring or promotion be based
on merit; or

(d) to create new positions in its workforce.
1995, c. 44, s. 6; 2003, c. 22, s. 237.

Employment of Aboriginal peoples

7 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, where
a private sector employer is engaged primarily in pro-
moting or serving the interests of Aboriginal peoples, the
employer may give preference in employment to Aborigi-
nal peoples or employ only Aboriginal peoples, unless
that preference or employment would constitute a dis-
criminatory practice under the Canadian Human Rights
Act.

1995, c. 44, s. 7; 2017, c. 26, s. 19(E).

Certain rights not employment barriers

8 (1) Employee seniority rights with respect to a layoff
or recall under a collective agreement or pursuant to the
established practices of an employer are deemed not to
be employment barriers within the meaning of this Act.

Other seniority rights

(2) Unless they are found to constitute a discriminatory
practice under the Canadian Human Rights Act, em-
ployee seniority rights other than those referred to in
subsection (1), including rights acquired under workforce
adjustment policies implemented when an employer is
downsizing or restructuring, under a collective agree-
ment or pursuant to an established practice, are deemed
not to be employment barriers within the meaning of this
Act.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART I Employment Equity
Employer Obligations
Sections 8-9

Adverse impact on employment opportunities

(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), where, after
a review under paragraph 9(1)(b), it appears that a right
referred to in either of those subsections that is provided
for under a collective agreement may have an adverse
impact on the employment opportunities of persons in
designated groups, the employer and its employees’ rep-
resentatives shall consult with each other concerning
measures that may be taken to minimize the adverse im-
pact.

Public sector

(4) The following are not, in relation to the public sector,
employment barriers within the meaning of the Act,
namely,

(a) priorities for appointment under the Public Ser-
vice Employment Act or regulations made by the Pub-
lic Service Commission; and

(b) workforce adjustment measures established by the

Treasury Board, including measures set out in agree-

ments relating to workforce adjustment, or by the

Public Service Commission or any other portion of the

public sector referred to in paragraphs 4(1)(c) and (d).
1995, c. 44, s. 8; 2003, c. 22, s. 164.

Analysis and review
9 (1) For the purpose of implementing employment eq-
uity, every employer shall

(a) collect information and conduct an analysis of the
employer’s workforce, in accordance with the regula-
tions, in order to determine the degree of the under-
representation of persons in designated groups in each
occupational group in that workforce; and

(b) conduct a review of the employer’s employment
systems, policies and practices, in accordance with the
regulations, in order to identify employment barriers
against persons in designated groups that result from
those systems, policies and practices.

Self-identification

(2) Only those employees who identify themselves to an
employer, or agree to be identified by an employer, as
Aboriginal peoples, members of visible minorities or per-
sons with disabilities are to be counted as members of
those designated groups for the purposes of implement-
ing employment equity.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART I Employment Equity
Employer Obligations
Sections 9-10

Confidentiality of information

(3) Information collected by an employer under para-
graph (1)(a) is confidential and shall be used only for the
purpose of implementing the employer’s obligations un-
der this Act.

1995, c. 44, s. 9; 2017, c. 26, s. 19(E).

Employment equity plan

10 (1) The employer shall prepare an employment equi-
ty plan that

(a) specifies the positive policies and practices that
are to be instituted by the employer in the short term
for the hiring, training, promotion and retention of
persons in designated groups and for the making of
reasonable accommodations for those persons, to cor-
rect the underrepresentation of those persons identi-
fied by the analysis under paragraph 9(1)(a);

(b) specifies the measures to be taken by the employer
in the short term for the elimination of any employ-
ment barriers identified by the review under para-
graph 9(1)(b);

(c) establishes a timetable for the implementation of
the matters referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b);

(d) where underrepresentation has been identified by
the analysis, establishes short term numerical goals
for the hiring and promotion of persons in designated
groups in order to increase their representation in
each occupational group in the workforce in which un-
derrepresentation has been identified and sets out
measures to be taken in each year to meet those goals;

(e) sets out the employer’s longer term goals for in-
creasing the representation of persons in designated
groups in the employer’s workforce and the employ-
er’s strategy for achieving those goals; and

(f) provides for any other matter that may be pre-
scribed.

Establishment of numerical goals
(2) In establishing the short term numerical goals re-

ferred to in paragraph (1)(d), every employer shall con-
sider

(a) the degree of underrepresentation of persons in
each designated group in each occupational group
within the employer’s workforce;

(b) the availability of qualified persons in designated
groups within the employer’s workforce and in the
Canadian workforce;

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART I Employment Equity
Employer Obligations
Sections 10-14

(c) the anticipated growth or reduction of the employ-
er’s workforce during the period in respect of which
the numerical goals apply;

(d) the anticipated turnover of employees within the
employer’s workforce during the period in respect of
which the numerical goals apply; and

(e) any other factor that may be prescribed.

Definitions

(3) In this section, “short term” means a period of not
less than one year and not more than three years, and
“longer term” means a period of more than three years.

Reasonable progress

11 Every employer shall ensure that its employment eq-
uity plan would, if implemented, constitute reasonable
progress toward implementing employment equity as re-
quired by this Act.

Implementation and monitoring of plan
12 Every employer shall

(a) make all reasonable efforts to implement its em-
ployment equity plan; and

(b) monitor implementation of its plan on a regular
basis to assess whether reasonable progress toward
implementing employment equity is being made.

Periodic review and revision of plan

13 Every employer shall, at least once during the period
in respect of which the short term numerical goals re-
ferred to in paragraph 10(1)(d) are established, review its
employment equity plan and revise it by

(a) updating the numerical goals, taking into account
the factors referred to in subsection 10(2); and

(b) making any other changes that are necessary as a
result of an assessment made pursuant to paragraph
12(b) or as a result of changing circumstances.

Information about employment equity

14 Every employer shall provide information to its em-
ployees explaining the purpose of employment equity
and shall keep its employees informed about measures
the employer has undertaken or is planning to undertake
to implement employment equity and the progress the
employer has made in implementing employment equity.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART I Employment Equity
Employer Obligations
Sections 15-18

Consultation with employee representatives

15 (1) Every employer shall consult with its employees’
representatives by inviting the representatives to provide
their views concerning

(a) the assistance that the representatives could pro-
vide to the employer to facilitate the implementation
of employment equity in its workplace and the com-
munication to its employees of matters relating to em-
ployment equity; and

(b) the preparation, implementation and revision of
the employer’s employment equity plan.

Where employees represented by bargaining agents
(2) Where employees are represented by a bargaining
agent, the bargaining agent shall participate in a consul-
tation under subsection (1).

Collaboration

(3) Every employer and its employees’ representatives
shall collaborate in the preparation, implementation and
revision of the employer’s employment equity plan.

Rule of interpretation

(4) Consultation under subsection (1) and collaboration
under subsection (3) are not forms of co-management.

New employers

16 (1) A person who becomes an employer after the day
on which this section comes into force shall, within eigh-
teen months after becoming an employer, comply with
sections 9 and 10.

Compliance audit

(2) The Commission may not conduct a compliance au-
dit of the discharge of the obligations of a person referred
to in subsection (1) within two years after the day on
which that person becomes an employer.

Records and Reports

Employment equity records

17 Every employer shall, in accordance with the regula-
tions, establish and maintain employment equity records
in respect of the employer’s workforce, the employer’s
employment equity plan and the implementation of em-
ployment equity by the employer.

Reports of private sector employers

18 (1) Every private sector employer shall, on or before
June | in each year, file with the Minister a report in re-
spect of the immediately preceding calendar year

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PARTI Employment Equity
Records and Reports
Section 18

containing information in accordance with prescribed in-
structions, indicating, in the prescribed manner and
form,

(a) the industrial sector in which its employees are
employed, the location of the employer and its em-
ployees, the number of its employees and the number
of those employees who are members of designated
groups;

(b) the occupational groups in which its employees
are employed and the degree of representation of per-
sons who are members of designated groups in each
occupational group;

(c) the salary ranges of its employees and the degree
of representation of persons who are members of des-
ignated groups in each range and in each prescribed
subdivision of the range and any other information in
relation to the salary of its employees that may be pre-
scribed; and

(d) the number of its employees hired, promoted and
terminated and the degree of representation in those
numbers of persons who are members of designated
groups.

Interpretation

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an employer is the
person who or organization that was the employer on De-
cember 31 in the immediately preceding year.

Electronic filing

(3) An employer may file a report using electronic media
in a manner specified in writing by the Minister and, in
such a case, the report is deemed to have been filed on
the day that the Minister acknowledges receipt of it.

Self-identification

(4) Only those employees who identify themselves to
their employer, or agree to be identified by their employ-
er, as Aboriginal peoples, members of visible minorities
and persons with disabilities are to be counted as mem-
bers of those designated groups for the purposes of the
report.

Certificate required

(5) A report shall be certified, in the prescribed manner,
as to the accuracy of the information contained in it and
shall be signed by the employer or, where the employer is
a corporation, by a prescribed person on behalf of the
corporation.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PARTI Employment Equity
Records and Reports
Sections 18-19

Additional information
(6) An employer shall include in a report a description of

(a) the measures taken by the employer during the re-
porting period to implement employment equity and
the results achieved; and

(b) the consultations between the employer and its
employees’ representatives during the reporting peri-
od concerning the implementation of employment eq-

uity.

Consolidated reports

(7) Where, in the opinion of the Minister, associated or
related federal works, undertakings or businesses are op-
erated by two or more employers having common control
or direction, the Minister may, on the application of the
employers, authorize them to file a consolidated report
with respect to employees employed by them on or in
connection with those works, undertakings or business-
es.

Exemption for private sector employers

(8) The Minister may, on the application of an employer,
exempt the employer from any or all of the requirements
of this section for a period not exceeding one year if, in
the opinion of the Minister, special circumstances war-
rant the exemption.

Copy to employees’ representatives

(9) An employer shall, on filing a report with the Minis-
ter under this section, provide its employees’ representa-
tives with a copy of the report.

Copy to Commission

(10) The Minister shall, on receipt of a report, send a
copy of it to the Commission.
1995, c. 44, s. 18; 2017, c. 26, s. 19(E); 2019, c. 29, s. 127.

Availability of reports of private sector employers

19 (1) Subject to subsection (2), every report filed under
subsection 18(1) shall be available for public inspection
at such places as may be designated, and in such form as
may be determined, by the Minister, and any person
may, on payment of a prescribed fee, not to exceed the
costs of furnishing a copy, obtain from the Minister a
copy of any of the reports.

Withholding of report

(2) The Minister may, on the application of an employer,
withhold the employer’s report from public inspection
for a period not exceeding one year if, in the opinion of
the Minister, special circumstances warrant the with-
holding.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PARTI Employment Equity
Records and Reports
Sections 20-21

Consolidation to be tabled

20 The Minister shall in each year prepare a report con-
sisting of a consolidation of the reports filed under sub-
section 18(1) together with an analysis of those reports
and shall cause the report to be laid before each House of
Parliament not later than the fifteenth sitting day that
that House of Parliament is sitting after the report is
completed.

Report of Treasury Board

21 (1) The President of the Treasury Board shall, in
each fiscal year, cause to be laid before each House of
Parliament a report in respect of the state of employment
equity in the portions of the federal public administra-
tion referred to in paragraph 4(1)(b) during the immedi-
ately preceding fiscal year.

Contents of report

(2) The report referred to in subsection (1) shall consist
of

(a) a consolidation and analysis of

(i) the number of employees employed in each por-
tion of the federal public administration referred to
in paragraph 4(1)(b) and the number of persons
who are members of each designated group so em-
ployed,

(ii) the total number of employees employed in all
portions of the federal public administration re-
ferred to in paragraph 4(1)(b) in each province and
in the National Capital Region and the number of
persons who are members of each designated group
so employed,

(iii) the occupational groups of employees and the
degree of representation of persons who are mem-
bers of each designated group in each occupational
group,

(iv) the salary ranges of employees and the degree
of representation of persons who are members of
each designated group in each range and in any
subdivision of the range, and

(v) the numbers of employees hired, promoted and
terminated and the degree of representation, in
those numbers, of persons who are members of
each designated group;

(b) a description of the principal measures taken by
the Treasury Board during the reporting period to im-
plement employment equity and the results achieved;

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PARTI Employment Equity
Records and Reports
Section 21

(c) a description of the consultations between the
Treasury Board and its employees’ representatives
during the reporting period concerning the implemen-
tation of employment equity; and

(d) any other information that the President of the
Treasury Board considers relevant.

Requirement to provide information

(3) Each portion of the public sector referred to in para-
graphs 4(1)(c) and (d), other than the Canadian Security
Intelligence Service, shall, within six months after the
end of each fiscal year, provide to the President of the
Treasury Board a report containing the information re-
ferred to in subsection (4) in relation to that portion dur-
ing that fiscal year and the President shall cause the re-
ports, together with the report referred to in subsection
(1), to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Contents of report
(4) A report referred to in subsection (3) shall consist of

(a) the information referred to in subparagraphs
(2)(a)() to (v) in relation to that portion;

(b) an analysis of the information referred to in para-
graph (a); and

(c) the information referred to in paragraphs (2)(b) to
(d) in relation to that portion.

Requirement to provide information

(5) The Canadian Security Intelligence Service shall,
within six months after the end of each fiscal year, pro-
vide to the President of the Treasury Board a report con-
taining the information referred to in subsection (6) in
relation to that portion during that fiscal year and the
President shall cause the report, together with the report
referred to in subsection (1), to be laid before each House
of Parliament.

Contents of report
(6) A report referred to in subsection (5) shall consist of

(a) the percentage of employees employed in that por-
tion who are members of each designated group;

(b) the occupational groups of employees in that por-
tion and the percentage of persons who are members
of each designated group in each occupational group;

(c) the salary ranges of employees in that portion and
the percentage of persons who are members of each

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PARTI Employment Equity
Records and Reports
Sections 21-22

designated group in each range and in any subdivision
of the range;

(d) the percentage of employees hired, promoted and
terminated in that portion who are members of each
designated group;

(e) an analysis of the information referred to in para-
graphs (a) to (d); and

(f) the information referred to in paragraphs (2)(b) to
(d) in relation to that portion.

Copy to Commission

(7) The President of the Treasury Board shall, as soon as
possible after a report referred to in any of subsections
(1), (3) and (5) is laid before each House of Parliament,
send a copy of the report to the Commission.

Copies to employees’ representatives

(8) As soon as possible after a report referred to in this
section is laid before each House of Parliament,

(a) in the case of a report referred to in subsection (1),
the President of the Treasury Board,

(b) in the case of a report referred to in subsection (3),
each portion of the public sector referred to in that
subsection, and

(c) in the case of a report referred to in subsection (5),
the Canadian Security Intelligence Service,
shall send a copy of the report to its employees’ represen-
tatives.
1995, c. 44, s. 21; 2003, c. 22, s. 165.

PART Il

Compliance

Compliance Audits

Compliance audits

22 (1) The Commission is responsible for the enforce-
ment of the obligations imposed on employers by sec-
tions 5,9 to 15 and 17.

Guiding policy

(2) The Commission shall, in discharging its responsibil-
ity under subsection (1), be guided by the policy that,
wherever possible, cases of non-compliance be resolved
through persuasion and the negotiation of written under-
takings pursuant to subsection 25(1) and that directions

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance
Compliance Audits
Sections 22-23

be issued under subsection 25(2) or (3) and applications
for orders be made under subsection 27(2) only as a last
resort.

Compliance officers designated

(3) The Commission may designate any person or cate-
gory of persons as employment equity compliance review
officers for the purposes of conducting compliance audits
of employers.

Where compliance officer may not act

(4) No person who has been designated as an investiga-
tor under section 43 of the Canadian Human Rights Act
to investigate a complaint under that Act in respect of an
employer may, during the investigation, conduct a com-
pliance audit of that employer.

Delegation by Commission

(5) The Commission may authorize any officer or em-
ployee of the Commission whom the Commission consid-
ers appropriate to exercise any power and perform any
duty or function of the Commission under this Act and
any power so exercised and any duty or function so per-
formed shall be deemed to have been exercised or per-
formed by the Commission.

Powers of compliance officers

23 (1) For the purposes of ensuring compliance with the
provisions referred to in subsection 22(1), a compliance
officer may conduct a compliance audit of an employer
and, for that purpose, may

(a) at any reasonable time, enter any place in which
the officer believes on reasonable grounds there is any
thing relevant to the enforcement of any of those pro-
visions; and

(b) require any person to produce for examination or
copying any record, book of account or other docu-
ment that the officer believes on reasonable grounds
contains information that is relevant to the enforce-
ment of any of those provisions.

Data processing systems and copying equipment

(2) In conducting a compliance audit, a compliance offi-
cer may

(a) reproduce or cause to be reproduced any record
from a data processing system in the form of a print-
out or other intelligible output and remove the print-
out or other output for examination and copying; and

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance
Compliance Audits
Sections 23-25

(b) use or cause to be used any copying equipment at
the place to make copies of any record, book of
account or other document.

Certificate to be produced

(3) Compliance officers shall be furnished with certifi-
cates in a form established by the Commission certifying
their designation as compliance officers and, on entering
a place under paragraph (1)(a), a compliance officer shall
show the certificate to the person in charge of the place if
the person requests proof of the officer’s designation.

Assistance to compliance officers
(4) The person in charge of a place entered pursuant to

paragraph (1)(a) and every person found in the place
shall

(a) give the compliance officer all reasonable assis-
tance to enable the officer to exercise the powers con-
ferred on compliance officers by this section; and

(b) provide the officer with any information relevant
to the enforcement of this Act that the officer may rea-
sonably require.

Security requirements

24 Every compliance officer or any other person acting
on behalf of or under the direction of the Commission
who receives or obtains information relating to a compli-
ance audit under this Act shall, with respect to access to
and use of that information by that compliance officer or
person, satisfy any security requirements applicable to,
and take any oath of secrecy required to be taken by, per-
sons who normally have access to and use of that infor-
mation.

Undertakings and Directions

Employer undertaking

25 (1) Where a compliance officer is of the opinion that
an employer

(a) has not collected information or conducted an
analysis referred to in paragraph 9(1)(a) or conducted
a review referred to in paragraph 9(1)(b),

(b) has not prepared an employment equity plan re-
ferred to in section 10,

(c) has prepared an employment equity plan that does
not meet the requirements of sections 10 and 11,

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance
Undertakings and Directions
Section 25

(d) has not made all reasonable efforts to implement
its employment equity plan in accordance with section
12,

(e) has failed to review and revise its employment eq-
uity plan in accordance with section 13,

(f) has failed to provide information to its employees
in accordance with section 14,

(g) has failed to consult with its employees’ represen-
tatives in accordance with section 15, or

(h) has failed to establish and maintain employment
equity records as required by section 17,

the compliance officer shall inform the employer of the
non-compliance and shall attempt to negotiate a written
undertaking from the employer to take specified mea-
sures to remedy the non-compliance.

Information re underrepresentation

(1.1) Where

(a) an employer has been informed of a non-compli-
ance by a compliance officer under subsection (1) and
the finding of non-compliance is based, in whole or in
part, on the apparent underrepresentation of Aborigi-
nal peoples, members of visible minorities or persons
with disabilities in the employer’s work force, as re-
flected in the employer's work force analysis conduct-
ed pursuant to paragraph 9(1)(a), and

(b) the employer believes that the apparent underrep-
resentation is attributable to the decision of employees
who may be members of the designated groups con-
cerned not to identify themselves as such or not to
agree to be identified by the employer as such under
subsection 9(2),

the employer may inform the compliance officer of such
belief.

Reason for underrepresentation to be considered

(1.2) Where the employer satisfies the compliance offi-
cer that the finding of non-compliance is attributable, in
whole or in part, to the reason described in paragraph
(1.1)(b) and that the employer has made all reasonable
efforts to implement employment equity, the compliance
officer shall take the reason into account in exercising
any powers under this section.

No employer identification of individual employees

(1.3) In satisfying the compliance officer under subsec-
tion (1.2) that the finding of non-compliance is at-
tributable, in whole or in part, to the reason mentioned

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance
Undertakings and Directions
Sections 25-26

in paragraph (1.1)(b), the employer must do so by means
other than the identification of individual employees in
its work force that the employer believes are members of
designated groups who have not identified themselves as
such, or agreed to be identified by the employer as such,
under subsection 9(2).

Direction

(2) Where a compliance officer fails to obtain a written
undertaking that, in the opinion of the compliance offi-
cer, would be sufficient to remedy the non-compliance,
the compliance officer shall notify the Commission of the
non-compliance and the Commission may issue and
send, by registered mail, a direction to the employer

(a) setting out the facts on which the officer’s finding
of non-compliance is based; and

(b) requiring the employer to take such actions as are
specified in the direction to remedy the non-compli-
ance.

Breach of undertaking

(3) Where a compliance officer obtains a written under-
taking and the compliance officer is of the opinion that
the employer has breached the undertaking, the compli-
ance officer shall notify the Commission of the non-com-
pliance and the Commission may issue and send, by reg-
istered mail, a direction to the employer requiring the
employer to take such actions as are specified in the di-
rection to remedy the non-compliance.

Amendment of direction

(4) The Commission may rescind or amend a direction
issued by the Commission pursuant to subsection (2) or
(3) on the presentation of new facts or on being satisfied
that the direction was issued without knowledge of, or
was based on a mistake as to, a material fact.

1995, c. 44, s. 25; 2017, c. 26, s. 19(E).

Direction of Commission

26 (1) Where a compliance officer is of the opinion that
an employer has failed to give reasonable assistance or to
provide information as required by subsection 23(4), the
compliance officer shall notify the Commission of the
non-compliance and the Commission may issue and
send, by registered mail, a direction to the employer

(a) setting out the facts on which the officer’s finding
of non-compliance is based; and

(b) requiring the employer to take such actions as are
specified in the direction to remedy the non-compli-
ance.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance
Undertakings and Directions
Sections 26-28

Amendment of direction

(2) The Commission may rescind or amend a direction
issued pursuant to subsection (1) on the presentation of
new facts or on being satisfied that the direction was is-
sued without knowledge of, or was based on a mistake as
to, a material fact.

Requests for Review or Order

Employer's request for review

27 (1) An employer to whom a direction is issued under
subsection 25(2) or (3) or 26(1) may make a request to
the Chairperson for a review of the direction

(a) in the case of a direction issued under subsection
25(2) or (3), within sixty days after the day on which it
is issued; and

(b) in the case of a direction issued under subsection
26(1), within thirty days after the day on which it is is-
sued.

Commission may apply

(2) If the Commission is of the opinion that an employer
has failed to comply with a direction issued by the Com-
mission, the Commission may apply to the Chairperson
for an order confirming the direction.

Limitation

(3) No application may be made pursuant to subsection
(2) where the employer has requested a review in accor-
dance with subsection (1).

1995, c. 44, s. 27; 1998, c. 9, s. 38.

Employment Equity Review Tribunals

Establishment of Tribunals

28 (1) If an employer makes a request under subsection
27(1) or the Commission makes an application under
subsection 27(2), the Chairperson shall establish an Em-
ployment Equity Review Tribunal to consider the request
or application.

Composition

(2) The Chairperson shall appoint a Tribunal consisting
of one member of the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal,
but the Chairperson may appoint a Tribunal of three
members if the Chairperson considers that the complexi-
ty or precedential significance of the request or applica-
tion requires a Tribunal of three members.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance

Employment Equity Review Tribunals
Section 28

Qualifications of members

(3) The Chairperson shall, in appointing members of the
Tribunal, take into consideration their knowledge and
experience in employment equity matters.

Presiding

(4) If a Tribunal consists of more than one member, the
Chairperson shall designate one of the members to pre-
side over the hearings of the Tribunal.

Acting after expiration of appointment

(4.1) A member whose appointment expires may, with
the approval of the Chairperson, conclude any hearing
that the member has begun, and a person performing du-
ties under this section is deemed to be a part-time mem-
ber for the purposes of subsection 48.2(2) of the Canadi-
an Human Rights Act.

Remuneration
(5) The members of a Tribunal shall be paid such remu-

neration as may be provided for under subsection 48.6(1)
of the Canadian Human Rights Act.

Travel expenses

(6) Members are entitled to be paid any travel and living
expenses incurred in carrying out duties as members of
the Tribunal while absent from their ordinary place of
residence that may be provided for under subsection
48.6(2) of the Canadian Human Rights Act.

(7) [Repealed, 2014, c. 20, s. 463]

Government services and facilities

(8) In performing its duties and functions, a Tribunal
shall, where available, make use of the services and facili-
ties of departments, boards and agencies of the Govern-
ment of Canada.

Rules
(9) The Chairperson may make rules governing the prac-
tice and procedure of Tribunals.

Security requirements

(10) Every member or other person acting on behalf of
or under the direction of a Tribunal who receives or ob-
tains information relating to a request or application re-
ferred to in subsection (1) shall, with respect to access to
and use of that information by that member or other per-
son, satisfy any security requirements applicable to, and

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance

Employment Equity Review Tribunals
Sections 28-30

take any oath of secrecy required to be taken by, persons
who normally have access to and use of that information.
1995, c. 44, s. 28; 1998, c. 9, s. 39; 2014, c. 20, s. 463; 2017, c. 26, s. 18.

Powers of Tribunal
29 (1) A Tribunal may

(a) in the same manner and to the same extent as a
superior court of record, summon and enforce the at-
tendance of witnesses and compel them to give oral
and written evidence on oath and to produce such
documents and things as the Tribunal considers nec-
essary for a full review;

(b) administer oaths; and

(c) receive and accept such evidence and other infor-
mation, whether on oath or by affidavit or otherwise,
as the Tribunal sees fit, whether or not that evidence
or information would be admissible in a court of law.

How matters to be dealt with

(2) A Tribunal shall conduct any matter that comes be-
fore it as informally and expeditiously as the circum-
stances and considerations of fairness and natural justice
permit.

Hearings to be public

(3) Subject to subsection (4), a hearing before a Tribunal
shall be conducted in public.

Hearings may be jn camera

(4) A hearing before a Tribunal may, on the request of an
employer, be held in camera if the employer establishes
to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that the circumstances
of the case so require.

Reasons for decision

(5) A Tribunal shall provide the parties to a proceeding
before the Tribunal with written reasons for its decision.

Reasons for decision

(6) A Tribunal shall, on request by any person, provide
the person with a copy of any decision of the Tribunal, in-
cluding a decision under subsection (4) to hold a hearing
in camera, together with the written reasons for the deci-
sion.

Decision of Tribunal
30 (1) A Tribunal may, after hearing a request made un-

der subsection 27(1) or an application made under sub-
section 27(2),

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance

Employment Equity Review Tribunals
Sections 30-33

(a) by order, confirm, vary or rescind the Commis-
sion’s direction; and

(b) make any other order it considers appropriate and
reasonable in the circumstances to remedy the non-
compliance.

Board may vary or rescind
(2) A Tribunal may vary or rescind any order made by it.

Orders are final

(3) An order of a Tribunal is final and, except for judicial
review under the Federal Courts Act, is not subject to ap-
peal or review by any court.

1995, c. 44, s. 30; 2002, c. 8, s. 182.

Enforcement of orders

31 (1) Any order of a Tribunal made under section 30
may, for the purposes of its enforcement, be made an or-
der of the Federal Court and is enforceable in the same
manner as an order of that Court.

Procedure

(2) To make an order of a Tribunal an order of the Fed-
eral Court, the usual practice and procedure of the Court
may be followed or a certified copy of the order may be
filed with the registrar of the Court, and from the time of
filing the order becomes an order of the Court.

Report of activities of Human Rights Commission

32 The Commission shall include in its annual report re-
ferred to in section 61 of the Canadian Human Rights
Act a report of its activities, including an assessment of
their effectiveness, under this Act during the year.

Limitations respecting Directions and
Orders

Limitation

33 (1) The Commission may not give a direction under
section 25 or 26 and no Tribunal may make an order un-
der section 30 where that direction or order would

(a) cause undue hardship on an employer;
(b) require an employer to hire or promote persons
who do not meet the essential qualifications for the

work to be performed;

(c) with respect to the public sector, require an em-
ployer to hire or promote persons without basing the

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance

Limitations respecting Directions and Orders
Sections 33-34

hiring or promotion on merit in cases where the Public
Service Employment Act requires that hiring or pro-
motion be based on merit, or impose on the Public
Service Commission an obligation to exercise its dis-
cretion regarding exclusion orders or regulations;

(d) require an employer to create new positions in its
workforce;

(e) impose a quota on an employer; or

(f) in the case of a direction or order respecting the es-
tablishment of short term numerical goals, fail to take
into account the factors set out in subsection 10(2).

Meaning of quota

(2) In paragraph (1)(e), quota means a requirement to
hire or promote a fixed and arbitrary number of persons
during a given period.

Public sector

(3) In making a direction or order that applies to the
public sector, the Commission, in the case of a direction,
and a Tribunal, in the case of an order, shall take into ac-
count the respective roles and responsibilities of

(a) the Public Service Commission and the Treasury
Board under the Public Service Employment Act and
the Financial Administration Act; or

(b) a portion of the public sector referred to in para-
graph 4(1)(c) or (d) under any other Act of Parliament.
1995, c. 44, s. 33; 2003, c. 22, s. 238.

Privileged Information

Privileged information

34 (1) Information obtained by the Commission under
this Act is privileged and shall not knowingly be, or be
permitted to be, communicated, disclosed or made avail-
able without the written consent of the person from
whom it was obtained.

Evidence and production of documents

(2) No member of the Commission or person employed
by it who obtains information that is privileged under
subsection (1) shall be required, in connection with any
legal proceedings, other than proceedings relating to the
administration or enforcement of this Act, to give evi-
dence relating to that information or to produce any
statement or other writing containing that information.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Il Compliance
Privileged Information
Sections 34-35

Communication or disclosure of information

(3) Information that is privileged under subsection (1)
may, on any terms and conditions that the Commission
considers appropriate, be communicated or disclosed to
a minister of the Crown in right of Canada or to any offi-
cer or employee of Her Majesty in right of Canada for any
purpose relating to the administration or enforcement of
this Act.

Exception

(4) Nothing in this section prohibits the communication
or disclosure of information for the purposes of legal pro-
ceedings relating to the administration or enforcement of
this Act.

Employer's consent required

(5) No information obtained by the Commission or a Tri-
bunal under this Act may be used in any proceedings un-
der any other Act without the consent of the employer
concerned.

PART Ill

Assessment of Monetary
Penalties

Violations

Violation

35 (1) Every private sector employer commits a viola-
tion of this Act who

(a) without reasonable excuse, fails to file an employ-
ment equity report as required by section 18;

(b) without reasonable excuse, fails to include in the
employment equity report any information that is re-
quired, by section 18 and the regulations, to be includ-
ed; or

(c) provides any information in the employment equi-
ty report that the employer knows to be false or mis-
leading.

Continuing violations

(2) A violation that is committed or continued on more
than one day constitutes a separate violation for each day
on which it is committed or continued.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Ill Assessment of Monetary Penalties
Violations

Sections 35-38

Violations not offences

(3) A violation is not an offence and accordingly the
Criminal Code does not apply in respect of a violation.

Assessment of monetary penalty

36 (1) The Minister may, within two years after the day
on which the Minister becomes aware of a violation, issue
a notice of assessment of a monetary penalty in respect of
the violation and send it by registered mail to the private
sector employer.

Limit
(2) The amount of a monetary penalty shall not exceed

(a) $10,000 for a single violation; and

(b) $50,000 for repeated or continued violations.

Factors to be considered

(3) In assessing the amount of a monetary penalty, the
Minister shall take into account

(a) the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of
the violation; and

(b) the wilfulness or intent of the private sector em-
ployer and the employer’s history of prior violations.

Notice of assessment of monetary penalty

37 A notice of the assessment of a monetary penalty
shall

(a) identify the alleged violation;
(b) specify the amount of the monetary penalty; and

(c) specify the place where the employer may pay the
monetary penalty.

Options

Employer's options
38 (1) An employer may, not later than thirty days after
receiving a notice of assessment of a monetary penalty,

(a) comply with the notice; or
(b) contest the assessment of the monetary penalty by

making a written application to the Minister for a re-
view, by a Tribunal, of that assessment.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Ill Assessment of Monetary Penalties
Options

Sections 38-39

Copy of application

(2) If the Minister receives a written application, the
Minister shall send a copy of it to the Chairperson.

Copy of notice of assessment

(3) If an employer who is issued a notice of assessment
of a monetary penalty fails to exercise one of the options
set out in subsection (1) within the period referred to in
that subsection, the Minister shall send a copy of the no-
tice to the Chairperson.

1995, c. 44, s. 38; 1998, c. 9, s. 40.

Review by Tribunal

39 (1) On receipt of a copy of a written application or a
copy of a notice of assessment, the Chairperson shall es-
tablish a Tribunal consisting of one member selected
from the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal to review the
assessment and shall

(a) send, by registered mail, a request that the em-
ployer appear before the Tribunal at the time and
place set out in the request to hear the allegations
against the employer in respect of the alleged viola-
tion; and

(b) in writing, advise the Minister who issued the no-
tice of assessment of the time and place set out in the
request.

Failure to appear before Tribunal

(2) Where an employer to whom a request is sent fails to
appear before a Tribunal at the time and place set out in
the request, the Tribunal shall consider all the informa-
tion that is presented to it by the Minister in relation to
the alleged violation.

Opportunity to make representations

(3) In conducting its review, a Tribunal shall provide the
Minister and the employer with a full opportunity consis-
tent with procedural fairness and natural justice to
present evidence and make representations to it with re-
spect to the alleged violation.

Determination of Tribunal

(4) Where at the conclusion of its proceedings a Tribunal
determines that the employer

(a) has not committed the alleged violation, the Tri-
bunal shall immediately inform the employer and the
Minister of its determination and no further proceed-
ings shall be taken against the employer in respect of
the alleged violation; or

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Ill Assessment of Monetary Penalties
Options

Sections 39-40

(b) has committed the alleged violation, the Tribunal
shall immediately

(i) issue to the Minister a certificate, in the pre-
scribed form, of its determination that sets out an
amount, not exceeding the applicable amount set
out in subsection 36(2), determined by the Tribunal
to be payable by the employer in respect of the vio-
lation, and

(ii) send a copy of the certificate to the employer by
registered mail.

Factors to be considered

(5) In determining an amount under subparagraph
(4)(b)Gi), a Tribunal shall take into account the factors set
out in subsection 36(3).

Burden of proof

(6) In proceedings under this section, the Minister has
the burden of proving, on a balance of probabilities, that
an employer has committed the alleged violation.

Certificate

(7) A certificate that purports to have been issued by a
Tribunal under subparagraph (4)(b)(i) is evidence of the
facts stated in the certificate, without proof of the signa-
ture or official character of the person appearing to have
signed the certificate.

Determinations are final

(8) A determination of a Tribunal under this section is fi-
nal and, except for judicial review under the Federal
Courts Act, is not subject to appeal or review by any
court.

1995, c. 44, s. 39; 1998, c. 9, s. 41; 2002, c. 8, s. 182.

Enforcement of Monetary Penalties

Registration of certificate

40 (1) A. certificate issued under subparagraph
39(4)(b)(i) may be registered in the Federal Court and
when registered has the same force and effect, and all
proceedings may be taken on the certificate, as if the cer-
tificate were a judgment in that Court obtained by Her
Majesty in right of Canada against the employer named
in the certificate for a debt in the amount set out in the
certificate.

Recovery of costs and charges

(2) All reasonable costs and charges associated with reg-
istration of the certificate are recoverable in like manner

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART Ill Assessment of Monetary Penalties
Enforcement of Monetary Penalties
Sections 40-41

as if they were part of the amount determined by the Tri-
bunal under subparagraph 39(4)(b)(i).

PART IV

General

Regulations
41 (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) defining, for the purposes of the Act, the expres-

sions “employee”, “hired”, “occupational group”, “pro-
moted”, “salary” and “terminated”;

(b) prescribing the manner of calculating the number
of employees employed by an employer for the pur-
pose of determining when an employer is considered
to employ one hundred or more employees;

(c) governing the collection of information and the
conduct of analyses referred to in paragraph 9(1)(a)
and the conduct of reviews referred to in paragraph

9(1)(b);

(d) governing the establishment and maintenance of
employment equity records referred to in section 17;

(e) prescribing anything that is to be prescribed by
this Act; and

(f) generally, for carrying out the purposes and provi-
sions of this Act.

Application
(2) A regulation made pursuant to subsection (1) may be

of general application or may apply to a particular em-
ployer or group of employers.

Where regulations apply to public sector

(3) No regulation may be made under subsection (1) that
applies to the public sector without prior consultation
with the Treasury Board.

Inconsistent meanings

(4) No expression defined pursuant to paragraph (1)(a)
that applies to the public sector shall be given a meaning
that is inconsistent with the meaning that that expression
or any similar expression is given under the Public Ser-
vice Employment Act.

Adaptation of Act to certain portions

(5) The Governor in Council may, taking into account
the operational effectiveness of the appropriate portion
of the public sector referred to in paragraph (a) or (b),

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART IV General
Sections 41-42

make any regulation that the Governor in Council consid-
ers necessary to adapt this Act or the regulations or any
provision of this Act or the regulations to accommodate

(a) the Canadian Security Intelligence Service; or

(b) where an order is made under paragraph 4(1)(d)
in relation to the Canadian Forces or the Royal Cana-
dian Mounted Police, the Canadian Forces or the Roy-
al Canadian Mounted Police.

Requirements

(6) A regulation made under subsection (5) shall be
made on the recommendation of the Treasury Board af-
ter consultation with

(a) in the case of a regulation respecting the Canadian
Security Intelligence Service, or the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police, the Minister of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness; and

(b) in the case of a regulation respecting the Canadian
Forces, the Minister of National Defence.

Requirements may differ

(7) The effect of a regulation made under subsection (5)
with respect to any matter may differ from the effect of
the Act or the regulations or of any provision of the Act or
the regulations with respect to that matter.

1995, c. 44, s. 41; 2005, c. 10, s. 34.

Powers, duties and functions of Minister
42 (1) The Minister is responsible for

(a) developing and conducting information programs
to foster public understanding of this Act and to foster
public recognition of the purpose of this Act;

(b) undertaking research related to the purpose of this
Act;

(c) promoting, by any means that the Minister consid-
ers appropriate, the purpose of this Act;

(d) publishing and disseminating information, issuing
guidelines and providing advice to private sector em-
ployers and employee representatives regarding the
implementation of employment equity; and

(e) developing and conducting programs to recognize
private sector employers for outstanding achievement
in implementing employment equity.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
PART IV General
Sections 42-45

Federal Contractors Program

(2) The Minister is responsible for the administration of
the Federal Contractors Program for Employment Equi-

ty.

Labour market information

(3) The Minister shall make available to employers any
relevant labour market information that the Minister has
respecting designated groups in the Canadian workforce
in order to assist employers in fulfilling their obligations
under this Act.

1995, c. 44, s. 42; 2012, c. 19, s. 602.

Delegation

43 The Minister may authorize those persons employed
in the federal public administration whom the Minister
considers to be appropriate to exercise any of the powers
and perform any of the duties and functions that may be
or are required to be exercised or performed by the Min-
ister under this Act or the regulations, and any power ex-
ercised or duty or function performed by any person so
authorized shall be deemed to have been exercised or
performed by the Minister.

1995, c. 44, s. 43; 2003, c. 22, s. 224(E).

Review of operation of Act

44 (1) Five years after the coming into force of this Act,
and at the end of every five year period thereafter, a com-
prehensive review of the provisions and operation of this
Act including the effect of those provisions shall be un-
dertaken by such committee of the House of Commons as
may be designated or established by the House for that
purpose.

Tabling of report

(2) A committee shall, within six months after the com-
pletion of a review referred to in subsection (1), submit a
report on its review to the House of Commons including
a statement of any changes the committee would recom-
mend.

Transitional Provision

Compliance with certain provisions

45 The Treasury Board, the Public Service Commission
and any person who is an employer to whom the Em-
ployment Equity Act, R.S., c. 23 (2nd Supp.), applied
shall, within one year after the coming into force of this
section, comply with sections 9 and 10 of this Act.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
Consequential Amendments
Sections 46 to 53-55

Consequential Amendments

46 to 53 [Amendments]

Repeal

54 [Repeal]

Coming into Force

Coming into force

‘55 This Act or any provision of this Act comes
into force on a day or days to be fixed by order of
the Governor in Council.

* [Note: Act in force October 24, 1996, see SI/96-93.]

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
RELATED PROVISIONS

RELATED PROVISIONS

— 1998, c. 9, s. 33

Definition of commencement day

33 (1) In this section, commencement day means the
day on which this section comes into force.

Members cease to hold office

(2) Subject to subsections (3), (4) and (5), the members
of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel cease to hold office
on the commencement day.

Continuing jurisdiction of Human Rights Tribunal

(3) The members of any Human Rights Tribunal ap-
pointed under the Canadian Human Rights Act before
the commencement day have jurisdiction with respect to
any inquiry into the complaint in respect of which the
Human Rights Tribunal was appointed.

Continuing jurisdiction of Review Tribunal

(4) The members of any Review Tribunal constituted un-
der the Canadian Human Rights Act before the com-
mencement day have jurisdiction with respect to any ap-
peal against a decision or order of a Human Rights
Tribunal.

Continuing jurisdiction of Employment Equity Review
Tribunal

(5) The members of any Employment Equity Review Tri-
bunal established under section 28 or 39 of the Employ-
ment Equity Act before the commencement day have ju-
risdiction over any matter in respect of which the
Tribunal was established.

Supervision by Chairperson of Canadian Human
Rights Tribunal

(6) The Chairperson of the Canadian Human Rights Tri-
bunal has supervision over and direction of the work of
any Human Rights Tribunal, Review Tribunal or Em-
ployment Equity Review Tribunal referred to in subsec-
tion (3), (4) or (5).

Remuneration

(7) Each member of a Human Rights Tribunal, Review
Tribunal or Employment Equity Review Tribunal re-
ferred to in subsection (3), (4) or (5), other than such a
member who is appointed as a full-time member of the
Canadian Human Rights Tribunal, shall be paid such re-
muneration as may be fixed by the Governor in Council.

Current to February 4, 2025

Last amended on January 1, 2021

Employment Equity
RELATED PROVISIONS

Travel expenses

(8) Each member of a Human Rights Tribunal, Review
Tribunal or Employment Equity Review Tribunal re-
ferred to in subsection (3), (4) or (5) is entitled to be paid
travel and living expenses incurred in carrying out duties
as a member of that Tribunal while absent from their
place of residence, but the expenses must not exceed the
maximum limits authorized by Treasury Board directive
for employees of the Government of Canada.

Current to February 4, 2025
Last amended on January 1, 2021
